What is the Headwaters Research Experience? The HRE is an affordable and accessible way for students looking to take their science education to the next level and bolster a college resume, participants design and create an original research project while being mentored by a professional scientist. Students see through the project from conception to publication by conducting field research (or compiling pre-existing available datasets) and learning how to analyze their findings. Students complete the program with a finalized research presentation and a formal research paper that will be submitted for publication. Mentors: Our professional scientist mentors from prestigious organizations such as UC Davis and Berkeley, University of Virginia, and NOAA, to name just a few, and are experienced in research and in mentoring students with a variety of research interests. They guide students to utilize a diverse array of research skills that can be used to study almost any topic imaginable. Benefits: Students emerge from the program with real-world, hands-on experience they can add to a college resume, contacts in the professional scientific community, a network of peers embarking on their own scientific endeavors, and life skills that will better prepare them for any career. STEM Connections on RePicture: At the end of our programs, we aid students in setting up a RePicture and LinkedIn account to jump-start their professional networking. RePicture is a Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education and career accelerator platform where students gain access to extracurricular programs and are connected to organizations such as NASA, MIT, and UC Berkeley: Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering. Building a Professional Network: In Q2 of 2009, LinkedIn had 37 million users. That number has grown to 756 million in 2021, emphasizing the importance and adoption of this platform as a professional networking hub for the masses. We help our students set up their own accounts to start building their professional networks. Alumni Discord: We have created a Discord server to function as an interactive alumni network where students can maintain connections to their mentors and cohort, and meet participants from previous programs. The server features constant science news updates, the latest announcements from Ivy league and R1 universities, career tips, studying music, a list of data repositories, and much more! Is it worth the cost? The Spring and Fall programs are affordable extracurricular activities priced at $1500, cost breakdown of $125 per week. In comparison, 1-on-1 tutoring services can range anywhere from $25-100 per hour depending on the region and subject! This program is a rewarding and valuable opportunity given the benefits and services provided. Your child will emerge with a sense of what research is actually like and the completion of a project they will be proud of for years to come!Part 1:  Developing Research Skills Students work digitally alongside their entire cohort of peers and one-on-one with a professional scientist mentor to create questions around a topic of interest. These questions soon blossom into a developed research project they can tackle wherever they have access to the outdoors. Students begin to imagine data collection techniques that will help them collect the information to answer their research question. What To Expect Students will meet digitally with the entire cohort once a week and in digital private sessions with their assigned mentor twice per week. Topics Covered: -how to design, refine, and apply an original research question to a research projectPart 2: Hands-on Research & Analysis Students use data collection techniques they designed to gather information, and refine their processes as needed to follow the scientific method. Students are guided through statistical analysis to make sense of their data and bring meaning to all that they’ve seen through exploration. This analysis leads to an eventual answer to their initial research question. What to Expect: Students continue to meet with their cohort and mentors and spend complete independent data collection and analysis outside of these meetings. This requires 4-8 hours of independent work per week outside of group sessions. Topics Covered: -how to analyze data collected -using digital statistical analysis tools. Part 3: Present & Publish Research Students produce digital research presentations including their research question, findings, and digital representations of this information. After presenting this research, students also author a research paper alongside their mentor. What to Expect: Students’ papers are published in the Headwaters Research Journal and submitted to a youth science journal for publication. Topics Covered: -how to create a digital research presentation -how to author a scientific research paper.Student Research Journal.Student Research Journal Research Experience students model the work of a professional scientist by creating journal articles they submit to a publication for consideration. These articles are also published in the Headwaters Research Journal. Browse current and past editions through the link below. Sample Study Topics Students can conduct research on almost any area of interest! Our mentors are trained to help refine your topic. Here are a few sample topics from past projects: Environmental Science/Ecology Systematics Social Science Geology Weather and Climate Health, Medicine, and Genetics. Meet The Mentors Some of our past research mentors: Jennifer Heppner: Ph.D. student at the University of Nevada Reno studying urban ecology using birds and other vertebrates Morgan Long: M.S. student at University of Nevada Reno studying wildlife disease ecology Heather Raimer: Ph.D. student at the University of Virginia studying genetics Keely Rodriguez: Ph.D. student at the University of Nevada Reno studying amphibian disease ecology André Sanchez, M.S.: San Joaquin Valley Organizer at CalWild, focused on watershed management, aquatic restoration, and community organization Katie Uckele: Ph.D. student at the University of Nevada Reno studying plant-insect interactions and chemical ecology Tara Webster: Ph.D. student at the University of Nevada Reno focused on science education and diversity, equity, and inclusion in the sciences. ABSTRACT Since distance education was first introduced in higher education, there has been controversy attached to whether it is as effective as face-to-face instruction. The explosion of Internet-driven instruction has only accelerated the discussion. This study was undertaken in a Midwestern university technology administration program, a bachelor’s degree completion program for students with an existing occupationally oriented associate degree. Eight-hundred eighty-five students were identified for the sample. A two-factor ANOVA was used to answer the first research question: Is there is a statistically significant difference between students’ grades in online classes and traditional face-to-face classes? Results showed no significant difference between the grades of online and face-to-face students. Chi-square analysis was used for Research Question 2: Is there a statistically significant difference between course retention in online classes and traditional face-to-face classes? No significant difference was found between course retention in online classes and face-to-face classes. Last, Research Question 3 was answered utilizing chi-square analysis. Research Question 3 was, Is there a statistically significant difference between program retention for students entering the program enrolled in online classes and students entering the program enrolled in traditional face-to-face classes? The data showed no significant difference in course retention of students who began the program in online courses and students who began in face-to-face courses. Implications for further action include recommendations for expansion of online courses and programs supported by the research data. Analysis of existing data of other online courses and programs is recommended. Recommendations for further research included analyzing different delivery variations and continued study iv of bachelor’s degree completion programs. Additional recommendations consisted of further analysis of specific retention factors affecting students in online education, including factors such as age, gender, and GPA on entering the program. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS There are so many to thank for their support and help along this journey, that I ask forgiveness for not acknowledging everyone. First and foremost, I want to thank my husband, John Kelly, for his never-ending support as I forged along. I also would like to thank my daughters, Jennifer and Kathleen, for their understanding when I was distracted, and for presenting me two beautiful grandsons as part of this process. I would like to thank my primary advisor, Dr. Susan Rogers, as well as Peg Waterman, Dr. Carolyn Doolittle, and Dr. Tim Peterson, for their suggestions and guidance. Dr. Rogers provided more than just encouragement in some very dark times, and without her help, this degree would never have been completed. I would like to thank the administration and faculty at Washburn University for their help and support with this whole process. I cannot forget the faculty in the School of Education Ed.D. program at Baker University as well; their experiences and encouragement provided me with a strong foundation to complete this journey and begin a new one. Last but not least, I offer thanks for my support group: my sister, Kay, and my friends, Karmey, Craig, Jill, Karen, David, and Charlsie. Without their shoulders to lean on, I would never have completed this journey, much less started it. I thank all of you for your patience with my lack of availability and my moods. There were others of you along the way who offered words of encouragement, and for that, I thank you. It is not until I began this process that I realized I had such a large group of friends and support. For that, I will be eternally grateful. 
